# Syllabus
## HGEN 612: Data Science 2
## SPRING 2026, 3 credit hours

Time: Wed / Fri, 10:00a-11:20a  
ClassRoom: VIPBG Conference Room (1-160), Biotech 1, 800 East Leigh Street  
ClassZoom: https://zoom.us/j/9927704427  

**DIRECTOR:**  
**Tim York**, PhD  
Director, VCU Data Science Lab  
Professor, Cellular-Molecular-Genetic Medicine  

**INSTRUCTOR:**  
**Ekaterina Smirnova**, PhD  
Assistant Professor, Biostatistics  

- - -

## Hybrid Synochronous Instruction
HGEN 612 will primarily meet in-person. Please check the course schedule for meeting location (physical/remote). When remote lectures are indicated there should be no expectation that content will be recorded. The course modality is "hybrid synchronous" and there is an attendance requirement (see below).


### In-person
There are limited outlets in the VIPBG Conference Room so be sure to bring a fully charged laptop to each class.


### Remote
My preference is that students attend remote lectures with their cameras on. Ok, so I know this isn't going to happen but how about with your camera on for the frist 10 minutes?  


## A Note on Participation
Please note that regardless of lecture location your participation and attendance grade will not be assessed in the regular fashion. I am more interested that you are engaged with the class (e.g., during class and/or on Slack) and your assignments reflect attempts to innovate past what you were taught (i.e., coding creativity requires some degree of self-study). Lectures will likely not extend the entire time and we will strive to use our time in a way that we find is most beneficial for learning. All I ask is that you reach out to me to discuss your circumstances if your in-person or remote learning experience is faltering.  


## Course Description
This course builds upon the material introduced in the prerequisite (HGEN 611/OVPR 611) by providing instruction on advanced techniques for working with data, applying machince learning techniques, exporing artificial intelligence, and producing highly reproducible data products - all highly marketable skills for future data scientists. Project based assignments culminate in students creating their own applications that take advantage of tidymodel principles to automate machine learning workflows, visually communicate knowledge with interactive graphics, and the use of Git and OSF for project management. The guiding principle of the course is that the these products of research should be open and accessible to all members of a project team for maximum impact. This course will continue the use of the statistical programming language R with a focus on advanced tidyverse functions for data wrangling and statistical model development.  


## Prerequisite
HGEN/OVPR 611 Data Science 1 or Instructor permission.  


## Textbook
All required reading/viewing material will be linked to the lecture schedule located on the Github page. There is no required textbook. However, [*R for Data Science*][101] (Wickham & Grolemund) is an excellent general reference and [*Advanced R*][102] (Wickham) is great for a more in-depth guide to the R language.  


## Student Responsibilities
  - Bring your laptop to each class and be prepared to follow along with practical data examples.
  - Check `R/00_install-course-packages.R` before each class to install any new packages.
  - Complete assigned readings before the scheduled lecture date.  
  - Review and practice the code presented in the previous session.  
  - Please ask questions during class.
  - Ask for help whenever needed. Instructors will try to respond to messages within 24 hours. For best response times on, for instance, coding problems posting on the `#hgen-612` channel is recommended and allows others to benefit from your question. Students are encouraged to contribute answers.
  - Get used to finding answers to coding problems on stackoverflow.com and sharing them on `#hgen-612`.
  - Review and practice the code presented in the previous session. This is worth repeating.
  
  
## Communication Guidelines
  - Communicate with instructors privately using Direct Messaging within the class Slack workspace.  
  - Interact with fellow students and faculty members on the `#hgen-612` Slack channel.
  - Expect some emails generated by Canvas.
  - Be encouraging and helpful in all interactions. These are difficult concepts that take lots of practice to master. We all make mistakes. Patience and positive feedback is appreciated.


## Course Materials
We will be using OSF (https://osf.io/24mp7/) as the hub for all course materials in combination with Github. Both of these file management tools work nicely together and allow for users of different skill levels to access and interact with materials. This approach is commonly used in the wild and so we will adopt it in this course, in lieu of Canvas, to promote familiarity with this system. Details where each group of files live are as follows:  

  - Presentations and reading materials will be stored directly on OSF.  
  - Code and course meta-information (e.g., syllabus) will be stored on the course Github site and linked to OSF.
  - Github has a steep learning curve and not everyone will become proficient users immediately - it takes a lot of practice. I will teach the basics so that everyone should be able to automagically access course materials. Otherwise, as previously stated, all materials will be accessible via the course OSF hub.
  - I do not plan on storing any materials on Canvas.


## "I Love Data" Week
The VCU Data Science Lab will participate in this VCU Library sponsored event in mid-February. Final details have not been set but students will be encouraged to attend relevant sessions. This will be a great opportunity to learn about NIH data policies, network, and see how skills learned in HGEN 611/612 fit into the overall picture of project data management.  

## ReproducibiliTea
Our class will participate in the informal [*ReproducibiliTea*][104] journal club. Students will select an article relevant to data science/open materials/reproducibility and lead a discussion open to the VCU community.  A sign-up sheet will be made available. Yes, tea will be provided.  

## Grading
The point distribution for grades is listed below. Details for each assignment will be presented in class.    

  - (05 points) Project 1: Github assignment
  - (05 points) Project 2: Flexdashboard code check
  - (25 points) Project 2: Final Submission  
  - (05 points) Project 3: Shiny code check  
  - (10 points) Project 3: Presentation 
  - (25 points) Project 3: Final Submission  
  - (05 points) I Love Data week attendence  
  - (10 points) ReproducibiliTea presentation and attendance
  - (10 points) Participation and attendance (may include other assignments TBD)  

## Attendance
You are allowed one *unexcused* attendence, otherwise 4 points will be deducted from your particpation grade for any additional absences. Excused absences will be considered if I am contacted by direct messaging via Slack at least 24 hours in advance. I'm fairly lenient.  


[101]: https://r4ds.had.co.nz/                                                      "R for Data Science"
[102]: https://adv-r.hadley.nz/index.html                                           "Advanced R"
[103]: https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1MkRa0tkXwMVP1An9rCB4ijF6IZPkogWv "Course Lectures"
[104]: https://reproducibilitea.org/                                                "ReproducibiliTea"
